--- PAGE 1 ---
Redefining the heterogeneity of peripheral nerve cells
in health and autoimmunity
Jolien Wolberta,1, Xiaolin Lia,1, Michael Heminga,1, Anne K. Mausbergb, Dagmar Akkermannc, Clara Frydrychowiczc,
Robert Fledrichd, Linda Groenewege, Christian Schulzf, Mark Stettnerb, Noelia Alonso Gonzaleze, Heinz Wiendla,
Ruth Stassartc,2, and Gerd Meyer zu Hörstea,2,3
aDepartment of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology, University Hospital Münster, Münster 48149, Germany; bDepartment of Neurology,
University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg Essen, Essen 45147, Germany; cDepartment of Neuropathology, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig 04103,
Germany; dInstitute of Anatomy, Leipzig University, Leipzig 04103, Germany; eInstitute of Immunology, Westfälische Wilhelms University, Münster 48149,
Germany; and fMedizinische Klinik und Poliklinik I, Klinikum der Universität München, Ludwig Maximilians Universität, München 81377, Germany
Edited by Lawrence Steinman, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, and approved March 13, 2020 (received for review July 17, 2019)
Peripheral nerves contain axons and their enwrapping glia cells
named Schwann cells (SCs) that are either myelinating (mySCs) or
nonmyelinating (nmSCs). Our understanding of other cells in the
peripheral nervous system (PNS) remains limited. Here, we provide
an unbiased single cell transcriptomic characterization of the
nondiseased rodent PNS. We identified and independently con-
firmed markers of previously underappreciated nmSCs and nerve-
associated fibroblasts. We also found and characterized two dis-
tinct populations of nerve-resident homeostatic myeloid cells that
transcriptionally differed from central nervous system microglia. In
a model of chronic autoimmune neuritis, homeostatic myeloid cells
were outnumbered by infiltrating lymphocytes which modulated
the local cell–cell interactome and induced a specific transcriptional
response in glia cells. This response was partially shared between
the peripheral and central nervous system glia, indicating common
immunological features across different parts of the nervous sys-
tem. Our study thus identifies subtypes and cell-type markers of
PNS cells and a partially conserved autoimmunity module induced
in glia cells.
transcriptomics | single cell RNA-seq | peripheral nervous system | Schwann
cell
T
he cellular composition of the peripheral nervous system
(PNS) appears simple. Neuronal cells are absent and only
their specialized cell protrusions termed axons extend into the
PNS. Instead, PNS cells are mainly composed of glia cells, that
are named Schwann cells (SCs) and morphologically are classi-
fied as either myelinating (mySCs) or nonmyelinating (nmSCs).
These SCs provide trophic support and electrical insulation to
axons partly through the formation of the myelin sheath (1).
Myelin is a cell membrane protrusion of SCs that enwraps axons
in multiple layers and is required for the rapid conduction of
action potentials by axons (2).
While mySCs have been studied in considerable detail, the
phenotype of nmSCs and other non-SC cell types, such as fi-
broblasts and vascular endothelium in the PNS, however, re-
mains poorly defined. Nerve-associated fibroblasts have mostly
been defined by morphological characteristics in the PNS, but
their function and lineage assignment remain controversial (3).
Also, while leukocytes are clearly relevant in inflammatory and
traumatic lesions to the PNS (4, 5), their exact composition and
phenotype under steady-state conditions remain unknown.
Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) allows defining the
cellular composition of complex tissues in an unbiased fashion.
However, a single cell characterization of the nondiseased PNS
has not been reported and only the transcriptional response to
nerve injury has been studied (6). In addition, the cellular re-
sponse of PNS parenchymal cells to local autoimmune reactions
remains unknown (4, 5).
Here, we generated an unbiased cellular map of the healthy
PNS at single cell resolution. We identified known and other
markers of mySCs and characterize the composition and marker
genes of nmSCs and nerve-associated fibroblasts. We also
identified a distinct composition of leukocytes in the PNS in-
cluding two subsets of tissue-resident homeostatic macrophages.
In a mouse model of chronic inflammatory neuropathy, we found
that endoneurial lymphocytes preferentially expand and PNS
parenchymal cells and their intercellular communication net-
works respond extensively to autoimmune tissue damage. We
found that this reaction to autoimmunity was partially shared
between peripheral and central nervous system glia cells, in-
dicating potentially conserved response mechanisms.
Results
Single Cell Transcriptomics Dissects the Cellular Composition of
Peripheral Nerves. We aimed to better characterize the cellular
composition of the PNS. First, we optimized cell extraction from
the PNS and achieved highest cell yield and viability by
Significance
We here present a transcriptional map of peripheral nerve cells
in health and autoimmunity. Identified marker genes of non-
myelinating Schwann cells and nerve-associated fibroblasts
will facilitate a better understanding of the complex cellular
architecture of peripheral nerves. The two distinct populations
of nerve-resident homeostatic myeloid cells suggest an un-
expectedly unique and heterogeneous local immune repertoire
in peripheral nerves with signs of heterogeneous ontogenetic
origin. Complex changes of local cell–cell communication net-
works indicate autoimmune neuritis as a disease affecting
“immune networks” rather than single cell types. The findings
also suggest that immunological features are partially shared
and conserved across different parts of the nervous system.
Author contributions: H.W., R.S., and G.M.z.H. designed research; J.W., X.L., A.K.M., D.A.,
C.F., R.F., L.G., and N.A.G. performed research; C.S., M.S., and N.A.G. contributed new
reagents/analytic tools; J.W., X.L., and M.H. analyzed data; J.W., R.S., and G.M.z.H. wrote
the paper; C.S. provided Flt3Cre-mT/mG mice; and M.S. provided ICAM-1−/−NOD mice and
Lewis rats.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
Data deposition: The raw scRNA-seq data supporting the findings in this study have been
deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository under accession code
GSE142541.
1J.W., X.L., and M.H. contributed equally to this work.
2R.S. and G.M.z.H. contributed equally to this work.
3To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: gerd.meyerzuhoerste@
ukmuenster.de.
This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1073/pnas.1912139117/-/DCSupplemental.
First published April 15, 2020.
9466–9476
|
PNAS
|
April 28, 2020
|
vol. 117
|
no. 17
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1912139117
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 155.254.126.203 on April 27, 2026 from IP address 155.254.126.203.

--- PAGE 2 ---
combining enzymatic digestion (SI Appendix, Fig. S1A) with
myelin depletion and flow cytometry-based sorting for viable
cells (Methods) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 B and C). On average, we
thereby obtained 1,520 ± 453 SD viable cells from the combined
brachial plexus and sciatic nerves of one mouse. We then pooled
cells from multiple mice (n = 12 per batch) and three biological
replicates (SI Appendix, Fig. S1D) as input for scRNA-seq. After
removal of low-quality cells (Methods), this returned transcrip-
tional information of 5,400 total high-quality PNS cells, with
596 ± 202 SD average genes detected per cell (SI Appendix,
Table S1). After normalization (Methods), we identified 12 total
PNS cell clusters (Fig. 1A).
Overall, 65% of the single cell transcriptomes were assigned to
SC and fibroblast cell types, 20% to vascular, and 15% to he-
matopoietic cell types (Fig. 1B). The unexpectedly high abun-
dance
of
hematopoietic
cells
compared
to
morphological
quantification (7) likely reflects their easier extraction and was
observed previously (6). One cluster expressed pan-Schwann cell
markers (e.g., Erbb3 and S100b) and also coexpressed myelin
protein genes (e.g., Mbp and Plp1), while another cluster did not
express myelin protein genes, but a known SC receptor (Ngfr/
p75) (Fig. 1C and SI Appendix, Table S3). We named these
clusters mySCs and nmSCs, respectively (Fig. 1A). An additional
cluster expressed fibroblast markers (fibro; Fn1, Fgfr1, Col1a,
and Col3a) (8). Detection of marker genes in only a proportion
of cells of a cluster (Fig. 1D) is inherent to the method (9).
Vascular clusters expressed canonical markers of vascular
smooth muscle cells (vSMCs; Acta2, Tagln, and Tpm2), of peri-
cytes (PCs; Rgs5 and Pdgrfb), of lymphatic endothelial cells
(lymph; Lyve1 and Prox1), and of vascular endothelial cells
(EC1s; Cldn5, Egfl7, and Pecam1) (10) (Fig. 1D and SI Appendix,
Table S2). PCs surround endothelial cells in the vessel wall of the
microcirculation (11). An additional endothelial cell cluster
expressed genes associated with the blood nerve barrier (EC2s;
Cldn1 and Slc16a1) (12). Additional transcripts in the EC2
cluster were either novel to endothelial cells (Moxd1 and Ntng1)
or had been described in subsets of brain or lung endothelial
cells (e.g., Lypd2, Krt19 and Dleu7) although EC2s were tran-
scriptionally distinct from brain/lung ECs (10). We thus identify a
unique transcriptional phenotype of a subset of PNS endothelial
cells.
Four additional clusters expressed pan-hematopoietic markers
(e.g., Ptprc/CD45) and specifically markers of the myeloid cell
lineage (MC; Lyz2), macrophages (MP; Cd68), T cells (TCs;
Cd3e), and B cells (BCs; Cd79) (Fig. 1D and SI Appendix, Table
S2) (9). Blood contamination is unlikely, because mice were in-
tracardially perfused and red blood cells (expressing Hba and
Hbb) were absent. We thus define the heterogeneity and provide
a census of PNS cells.
To relate our dataset with human diseases, we plotted the
average expression of genes associated with hereditary neurop-
athies against the cell clusters (SI Appendix, Fig. S2A). We found
that—except for myelin protein genes—most neuropathy genes
were preferentially expressed in non-SC cell types (SI Appendix,
Fig. S2A), suggesting a potential relevance of nonglia cell types
in inherited PNS disorders. Notably, neuronal cells are not in-
cluded in our dataset, which may exaggerate the role of these
genes in nonglia cells.
Detailed
Transcriptomic
Characterization
of
Schwann
Cell
and
Fibroblast Clusters. Next, we characterized selected clusters in
greater detail. The mySC cluster expressed genes encoding PNS
myelin proteins (Plp1, Mbp, and Mpz), a key SC lineage tran-
scription factor (Sox10), and other regulators of myelination
(e.g., Ptn and Cryab) (13) (Fig. 1 C and D). In addition, genes
