--- PAGE 1 ---
ARTICLE
scRNA-seq generates a molecular map of emerging
cell subtypes after sciatic nerve injury in rats
Ditte Lovatt
1✉, Alex Tamburino2, Alicja Krasowska-Zoladek1, Raul Sanoja1,4, Lixia Li3, Vanessa Peterson3,
Xiaohai Wang1 & Jason Uslaner1
Patients with peripheral nerve injury, viral infection or metabolic disorder often suffer neuro-
pathic pain due to inadequate pharmacological options for relief. Developing novel therapies has
been challenged by incomplete mechanistic understanding of the cellular microenvironment in
sensory nerve that trigger the emergence and persistence of pain. In this study, we report a high
resolution transcriptomics map of the cellular heterogeneity of naïve and injured rat sensory
nerve covering more than 110,000 individual cells. Annotation reveals distinguishing molecular
features of multiple major cell types totaling 45 different subtypes in naïve nerve and an
additional 23 subtypes emerging after injury. Ligand-receptor analysis revealed a myriad of
potential targets for pharmacological intervention. This work forms a comprehensive resource
and unprecedented window into the cellular milieu underlying neuropathic pain and demon-
strates that nerve injury is a dynamic process orchestrated by multiple cell types in both the
endoneurial and epineurial nerve compartments.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03970-0
OPEN
1 Department of Neuroscience, Merck & Co., Inc, West Point, PA, USA. 2 Department of Data and Genome Sciences, Merck & Co., Inc, West Point, PA, USA.
3 Department of Genome and Biomarker Science, Merck & Co., Inc, Boston, MA, USA. 4Present address: Biomarkers & Imaging, Vertex Pharmaceuticals,
Boston, USA. ✉email: Ditte.Lovatt@merck.com
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |  (2022) 5:1105 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03970-0 | www.nature.com/commsbio
1
1234567890():,;

--- PAGE 2 ---
N
europathic pain is caused by damage or disease to the
peripheral somatosensory nervous system and is diag-
nosed when non-noxious temperature or tactile stimuli is
experienced as painful. Frequent causes include metabolic, viral,
or chemical disruption leading to debilitating conditions such as
diabetic neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, and chemotherapy-
induced neuropathic pain, respectively. Gabapentinoids, tricyclic
antidepressants, opioids, and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors are among available treatments that demonstrate
modest efﬁcacy, however, they also produce a range of unwanted
adverse effects limiting their use, including lethargy, nausea, and
potential for addiction1. A common cellular target of analgesic
therapies involve managing neuronal excitation directly without
addressing dysfunctional signaling of nerve-resident non-neuro-
nal cell types, which may be involved in precipitating neuropathic
pain. Hence, studies exploring novel mechanisms of neuropathic
pain and identifying strategies for interfering with non-neuronal
peripheral signals could accelerate the development of long-
needed therapies into the clinic2. Given the poor management of
neuropathic pain by available treatments, this clearly deﬁnes an
area of medical need.
The highly complex and heterogenous microenvironment of
nerve tissue has historically challenged efforts pinpointing the
molecular changes that accompany nerve injury with cellular
resolution. In turn, this has compromised the ability to clearly
identify cellular subtypes that reside within naive nerve and that
emerge after injury, and has led to controversies regards the
cellular origins of promising targets and how to experimentally
validate them. For instance, controversy exists as to the cellular
origin of the drug target AT2R3,4. Over the past decades only a
limited number of novel drug targets have entered the clinic, only
to fail in demonstrating robust efﬁcacy. Therefore, in order to
devise a clear and actionable strategy for the discovery of novel
analgesics, we must obtain a better understanding for the mole-
cular changes in nerve after insult and the cellular underpinnings
that may develop into persistent neuropathic pain.
Recently, the development of single-cell RNA-sequencing
(scRNA-seq) has allowed for detailed discovery of cell subtypes in
tissues and have enabled a substantial expansion of cell type
classiﬁcation in many tissues, including the CNS5. Application of
scRNA-seq to nerve tissue specimens6–9 have recently provided
novel insight into the cellular composition of nerve tissues.
However, the limited sizes of these studies prevented in depth
identiﬁcation of any scarce cell subtypes that reside in naive nerve
or arise after insult.
Here, in our study, we analyzed high-quality transcriptomes in
more than 112,000 individual cells from sciatic nerve tissue,
which enabled deciphering the cellular composition of naive
nerve among ﬁve major cell groups including Schwann cells,
ﬁbroblasts, lymphoid cells, myeloid cells, and vascular cells.
Further, we also investigated the molecular consequences after
injury using the chronic constriction injury (CCI) model10–12 in
which rats develop chronic neuropathic pain within days of
injury. Our study reports on the identiﬁcation of 45 different cell
subtypes in naive tissue, and 23 transient or persistent cell sub-
types that emerge after injury, and reveals the ligand–receptor
interactions among them. This study provides a foundational
resource for the exploration of cellular interactions that accom-
pany nerve injury, and may inspire future studies exploring novel
drug targets as well as the causality that underlie the emergence
and persistence of nociception in painful conditions.
Results
To investigate the cellular subtypes in naive nerve and those that
emerge after nerve injury, we used scRNA-seq of enzymatically
dissociated naive and injured rat sciatic nerve at three discrete
timepoints post chronic constriction injury (CCI; 3, 12, and
60 days post CCI) (Fig. 1a). We chose these timepoints based on
the development of mechanical allodynia and thermal hyper-
algesia in the CCI model present at day 3, 12, and 60 post-
injury10–12. At day 3 and 12, early and late phases of acute
inﬂammation, respectively, is also relevant for the development of
edema, cell inﬁltration, and proliferation. At day 60 post-injury,
acute inﬂammation have subsided, some animals may experience
a partial recovery of nociceptive hypersensitivity, but scarring of
nerve persists. To ensure only tissue-adherent cells were proﬁled,
but not circulating cells, we transcardially perfused the animals
before tissue extraction, which resulted in a near elimination of
red blood cells indicative of removal of circulating blood cells
(Supplementary Fig. 1). From each timepoint, we sampled
between 10,351 and 62,101 cells, and between 3 and 7 biological
replicates (Supplementary Table 1) totaling 112,521 cluster-
assigned cells for the entire dataset. We achieved high-quality
data enabling us to identify ~2600 median genes per cluster
across the entire dataset (Supplementary Fig. 1). Given the high
number of cells and multiple timepoints assayed, our annotation
strategy consisted of ﬁrst using unsupervised clustering of all cells
from all timepoints to classify every cell as a member of a major
cell group (Fig. 1b), and then subsequently re-cluster individual
major cell groups to explore biology within them.
Unsupervised clustering identiﬁed 32 clusters (Supplementary
Figs. 2 and 3) that based on known markers and differentially
expressed genes could be classiﬁed into ﬁve major cell groups
described as lymphoid cells (B cells, NK cells, and T cells),
myeloid cells (dendritic cells, mast cells, and monocytes), ﬁbro-
blasts (epineurial, perineurial, and endoneurial ﬁbroblasts), vas-
cular cells (smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells), and
Schwann cells (Fig. 1c–e). Using this approach, we classiﬁed
>99% of the cells. Each cell type comprised cells from all time-
points, except for a very small group of cells which we termed
mast cells based on markers expressed in the uninjured state
(Supplementary Fig. 4). The resulting identiﬁcation of cell types
was consistent with previously published descriptions of the
cellular anatomy of sciatic nerve, suggesting our protocols
recovered cells irrespective of type. We did not recover neurons,
for which the cell body reside in the dorsal root ganglion and
were not within scope of the current effort and have been pub-
lished elsewhere13.
In the naive nerve, we identiﬁed 36.1% vascular cells, 29.6%
Schwann cells, 20.6% ﬁbroblasts, 11.5% myeloid cells, and 2.2%
lymphoid cells. While every major cell type was represented at
each timepoint, there were signiﬁcant changes in the proportion
among them after injury (Fig. 1f). Importantly, using histology we
determined that a signiﬁcant increase in cell density was elicited
by injury at days 12 and 60 (Fig. 1g), which may be explained by
inﬁltration and proliferation of cells and should factor into the
interpretation of relative proportion of type in Fig. 1f.
Schwann cells respond to injury by proliferation and differ-
entiation into a transient repair-like phenotype. To explore
biology within cellular subtypes in each major cell group
including cell proliferation and inﬁltrating types before and after
injury, we next subclustered individual cell groups across all
timepoints. We ﬁrst subclustered the Schwann cell group (16,259
cells) and identiﬁed 15 clusters all of which expressed pan-
Schwann cell markers (S100b and Sox10), except for cluster 9 (746
cells) which comprised putative doublets (Fig. 2a and Supple-
mentary Fig. 5). Based on known markers, we were able to further
classify each cluster into one of the following subtypes: myeli-
nating Schwann cells (Prx14), non-myelinating Remak Schwann
ARTICLE
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03970-0
2
COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |   (2022) 5:1105 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-022-03970-0 | www.nature.com/commsbio

--- PAGE 3 ---
L4
L5
L6
Sciatic nerve
CCI
Single cell dissociate
Beads
Cells
Oil
Single cell library
generation
Schwann cells
Epi. FBs
Endo. FBs
Peri. FBs
vSMC
Endothelial
NK cells
T cells
Macrophages
Mast
Dendritic
B cells
Harvest timepoints
3 12
60 days post CCI
Naive
Uninjured
a.
b.
Sfrp2
Cd68
Cd3e
Sox10
Itgb4
Siglech
